README.md, before:

# WebSocket Chat Application
Kafka Chat is a real-time chat application that blends Rust's performance with Next.js' modern UI.
Powered by Axum, Kafka, and React, it showcases how microservices, streaming, and web technologies come together to deliver seamless, real-time communication.

## Features
**Real-time Messaging:** Instant message delivery via WebSockets

**Active User Tracking:** See who's currently online with live status updates

**Message Persistence:** All messages stored in Kafka for durability

**Modern UI:** Clean, responsive interface with message timestamps

**User Identification:** Unique usernames with session management

**Auto-scroll:** Automatic scrolling to the latest messages

## Architecture
```
Frontend (Next.js/React)
        ↓
WebSocket Connection
        ↓
Rust Backend (Axum)
        ↓
Apache Kafka
```

## Prerequisites
  -Node.js 18+ and npm
  
  -Rust and Cargo

  -Apache Kafka running on localhost:9092

## Installation & Setup
### 1. Backend Setup
Clone the repository
```
git clone git@github.com:cosmas-ships/kafka_rust_chat.git
cd kafka_rust_chat
```

Start the Rust backend
```
cd backend
cargo run
```
Backend will start on: ws://localhost:3001

### 2. Frontend Setup
In a new terminal, navigate to frontend
```
cd frontend
```
Install dependencies
```
npm install
```
Start the development server
```
npm run dev
```
Frontend will start on: 
```
http://localhost:3000
```
### 3. Kafka Setup
Make sure Kafka is running and create the required topic:

```
kafka-topics.sh --create --topic chat-room --bootstrap-server localhost:9092
```
## Usage
Access the Application: Open 
```
http://localhost:3000
```
in your browser

Set Username: Enter your username when prompted

Start Chatting: Type messages and press Enter or click Send

View Active Users: See online users in the right sidebar

## Features in Detail
-Real-time Messaging
Messages appear instantly for all connected users

-Timestamps show when each message was sent

-Visual distinction between your messages and others'

-Active User Tracking
Green status indicators show online users

-Users automatically removed after 5 minutes of inactivity

-Real-time updates when users join or leave

Message Format
```
interface ChatMessage {
  sender_id: string    // Unique user identifier
  username: string     // Display name
  text: string        // Message content
  timestamp: string   // ISO timestamp
}
```
## Configuration
Backend Configuration
WebSocket Port: 3001

Kafka Server: localhost:9092

Kafka Topic: chat-room

Frontend Configuration
WebSocket URL: ws://localhost:3001/ws

Development Server: http://localhost:3000

## Project Structure
```
websocket-chat-app/
├── backend/
│   ├── src/
│   │   └── main.rs          # Rust WebSocket server
│   └── Cargo.toml
└── frontend/
    ├── src/
    │   └── app/
    │       └── page.tsx     # React chat component
    ├── package.json
    └── next.config.js
```
## UI Components
**Message Bubbles**: Distinct styling for sent vs received messages

**User Sidebar:** Real-time active user list with status indicators

**Input Area:** Clean message input with send button

**Header:** Application title and description

## Message Flow
User types message → Frontend sends via WebSocket

Backend receives message → Adds UUID and timestamp

Message published to Kafka → Stored for persistence

Backend broadcasts to all clients → Real-time delivery

Frontend displays message → Updates UI immediately

## Development
Backend Dependencies
```
axum: Web framework with WebSocket support

rdkafka: Kafka client for Rust

tokio: Async runtime

uuid: Unique ID generation

chrono: Timestamp handling
```
Frontend Dependencies
```
React: UI framework

WebSocket API: Native browser WebSocket

uuid: Unique ID generation

Lucide React: Icons
```

## Troubleshooting
### Common Issues

WebSocket Connection Failed

- Ensure backend is running on port 3001

- Check ws://localhost:3001/ws is accessible

Kafka Connection Issues

- Verify Kafka is running on localhost:9092

- Confirm chat-room topic exists

Frontend Build Errors

- Clear node_modules and reinstall dependencies

- Check Node.js version compatibility

## Future Enhancements
- Message history loading

- Private messaging

- File sharing

- Message reactions

- User avatars

- Chat rooms/channels

- Message search

- Mobile app

## Contributing
-Fork the repository

-Create a feature branch

-Commit your changes

-Push to the branch

-Open a Pull Request

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

#### Happy Chatting! 🎉

Commit message:

Revise README for clarity and detail
Expanded project description and learning outcomes.

README.md, after:

# WebSocket Chat Application
Kafka Chat is a real-time chat application built with a Rust (Axum + Kafka) backend and a Next.js/React frontend.
This project started as an exploration of how modern systems handle real-time communication, scalability, and fault tolerance, and it evolved into a complete learning experience in microservice architecture, event-driven design, and frontend–backend integration.

Throughout the build, I learned how to:

- Stream real-time data using Kafka and WebSockets

- Build a scalable API with Axum in Rust

- Manage state and user activity efficiently across services

- Design clean, responsive UIs in Next.js/React

- Write clear, well-documented code that others can easily follow and extend

## Features
**Real-time Messaging:** Instant message delivery via WebSockets

**Active User Tracking:** See who's currently online with live status updates

**Message Persistence:** All messages stored in Kafka for durability

**Modern UI:** Clean, responsive interface with message timestamps

**User Identification:** Unique usernames with session management

**Auto-scroll:** Automatic scrolling to the latest messages

## Architecture
```
Frontend (Next.js/React)
        ↓
WebSocket Connection
        ↓
Rust Backend (Axum)
        ↓
Apache Kafka
```

## Prerequisites
  -Node.js 18+ and npm
  
  -Rust and Cargo

  -Apache Kafka running on localhost:9092

## Installation & Setup
### 1. Backend Setup
Clone the repository
```
git clone git@github.com:cosmas-ships/kafka_rust_chat.git
cd kafka_rust_chat
```

Start the Rust backend
```
cd backend
cargo run
```
Backend will start on: ws://localhost:3001

### 2. Frontend Setup
In a new terminal, navigate to frontend
```
cd frontend
```
Install dependencies
```
npm install
```
Start the development server
```
npm run dev
```
Frontend will start on: 
```
http://localhost:3000
```
### 3. Kafka Setup
Make sure Kafka is running and create the required topic:

```
kafka-topics.sh --create --topic chat-room --bootstrap-server localhost:9092
```
## Usage
Access the Application: Open 
```
http://localhost:3000
```
in your browser

Set Username: Enter your username when prompted

Start Chatting: Type messages and press Enter or click Send

View Active Users: See online users in the right sidebar

## Features in Detail
-Real-time Messaging
Messages appear instantly for all connected users

-Timestamps show when each message was sent

-Visual distinction between your messages and others'

-Active User Tracking
Green status indicators show online users

-Users automatically removed after 5 minutes of inactivity

-Real-time updates when users join or leave

Message Format
```
interface ChatMessage {
  sender_id: string    // Unique user identifier
  username: string     // Display name
  text: string        // Message content
  timestamp: string   // ISO timestamp
}
```
## Configuration
Backend Configuration
WebSocket Port: 3001

Kafka Server: localhost:9092

Kafka Topic: chat-room

Frontend Configuration
WebSocket URL: ws://localhost:3001/ws

Development Server: http://localhost:3000

## Project Structure
```
websocket-chat-app/
├── backend/
│   ├── src/
│   │   └── main.rs          # Rust WebSocket server
│   └── Cargo.toml
└── frontend/
    ├── src/
    │   └── app/
    │       └── page.tsx     # React chat component
    ├── package.json
    └── next.config.js
```
## UI Components
**Message Bubbles**: Distinct styling for sent vs received messages

**User Sidebar:** Real-time active user list with status indicators

**Input Area:** Clean message input with send button

**Header:** Application title and description

## Message Flow
User types message → Frontend sends via WebSocket

Backend receives message → Adds UUID and timestamp

Message published to Kafka → Stored for persistence

Backend broadcasts to all clients → Real-time delivery

Frontend displays message → Updates UI immediately

## Development
Backend Dependencies
```
axum: Web framework with WebSocket support

rdkafka: Kafka client for Rust

tokio: Async runtime

uuid: Unique ID generation

chrono: Timestamp handling
```
Frontend Dependencies
```
React: UI framework

WebSocket API: Native browser WebSocket

uuid: Unique ID generation

Lucide React: Icons
```

## Troubleshooting
### Common Issues

WebSocket Connection Failed

- Ensure backend is running on port 3001

- Check ws://localhost:3001/ws is accessible

Kafka Connection Issues

- Verify Kafka is running on localhost:9092

- Confirm chat-room topic exists

Frontend Build Errors

- Clear node_modules and reinstall dependencies

- Check Node.js version compatibility

## Future Enhancements
- Message history loading

- Private messaging

- File sharing

- Message reactions

- User avatars

- Chat rooms/channels

- Message search

- Mobile app

## Contributing
-Fork the repository

-Create a feature branch

-Commit your changes

-Push to the branch

-Open a Pull Request

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

#### Happy Chatting! 🎉
